# Frama-C {#framac}

## AST {#framac-ast}

This component displays the source code as normalized by Frama-C, on which
analyses are performed. It is the main component to interact by selecting
code elements: statements, expressions, variables, annotations, etc.

Left-clicking on an AST element selects it globally:
many other components react to this selection and show information related
to the selected element.
Some components even react when an element is hovered over by the mouse.

Right-clicking on an AST element opens a contextual menu offering more actions
related to the element, including:
- on functions and variables, go to (and select) their declaration;
- on a function declaration, find all their call sites;
- on an lvalue, select all statements reading or modifying its value
  according to the Eva plug-in;
- on a function, statement or annotation: prove them using the WP plug-in.

## Source code {#framac-source-code}

This component displays the source code of the files given to Frama-C.
It is synchronized with the [AST](#framac-ast) component: it is centered
on the line containing the currently selected AST element;
when possible, left-clicking on a line selects the related AST element.

Note that the GUI is not an IDE: you cannot edit the source code with it.
However, Ctrl+click opens the file in an external editor at the selected
location. The editor (emacs by default) can be configured in the GUI
preferences.

Other useful shortcuts are:
- Alt+F to search for a given text or regexp.
- Alt+G to go to a given line.

## Inspector {#framac-inspector}

The inspector shows various kinds of information about selected and hovered AST
elements.
The button [icon-clipboard] in the component titlebar allows you to show or hide
some of this information.

Available kinds of information include:
- the source file location of any element;
- the type of a C expression or ACSL term;
- the size of a type or variable;
- the logical status of an ACSL property;
- the possible values of a variable or expression, according to Eva.

The information of an element can be pinned using the [icon-pin] button,
in which case it remains in the component even if the element is no longer
selected.
Alt-clicking on an AST element also pins the element information in the
Inspector.

## Properties {#framac-properties}

This table lists all ACSL properties about the analyzed program, and the
logical status of each one.
Columns can be shown or hidden by right-clicking on the table header.
Left-clicking on a row selects the related property in the [AST](#framac-ast).

The right panel, toggled by the [icon-clipboard] button in the component
titlebar, allows filtering these properties according to many criteria.

The number of displayed properties and the total number of properties
are shown in the component titlebar.

## Locations {#framac-locations}

Some user actions may select several AST elements at once, for instance
when using these contextual menu entries in the [AST](#framac-ast) component:
- 'Go to caller' (on a function declaration) selects all calls to the given function;
- 'Studia' (on a lvalue) selects all statements that may read or write the given lvalue;
- 'Impact analysis' (on a statement) selects all statements impacted by the given statement.

In this case, this component lists all selected elements in a table, with
their source code location and their scope (the global declaration in which
they appear).
Left-clicking on a row globally selects the related AST element.
Above the table, a short label indicates the origin of the selection.

In the component titlebar:
- the [icon-angle.left] [icon-angle.right] buttons allow cycling between selected elements;
- the [icon-filter] button allows filtering selected elements according to their scope
  (the function or variable declaration in which they appear);
- the [icon-trash] button clears the current selection.

In the sidebar, the [icon-multicheck] icon signals functions and variable
declarations containing at least one element listed in this component.

## Messages {#framac-messages}

This component contains all messages generated by the Frama-C kernel and
plug-ins. By default, it only shows warning, error and failure messages.

The right panel, toggled by the [icon-clipboard] button in the component
titlebar, allows you to filter the displayed messages, and to search for
a given text in all messages.

## Projects {#framac-project}

A Frama-C project groups together one source code with the results obtained
on this code for one given set of parameters.
In one Frama-C session, several projects can be created to work on several
versions of a source code, on different source codes, or with different
analysis parameters.
For instance, it is possible to analyze the same code with different parameters
in different projects, and to compare the obtained results.

At any time, there is only one _current_ project: all information shown
in the GUI relates to the current project, and all actions are applied to
the current project.

You can manage projects and change the current project via the
[menu](#framac-project-menu) and the project [sidebar](#framac-project-sidebar).

By default, a Frama-C session contains only one project named _default_.

### Project Menu {#framac-project-menu}

The project menu is divided into 2 parts:

* Actions:
  * _New project_: creates a new empty project, which becomes the current project.
  * _Load project_: loads an existing project from a file, making it the current project.
  * Duplicate the current project.
  * Delete the current project.
  * Rename the current project.
* The list of projects.
It always contains the current project, which is selected.
Selecting another project (if any) changes the current project.

### Project sidebar {#framac-project-sidebar}

The project sidebar icon is [icon-project].

In the sidebar title, you can:
* [icon-CIRC.PLUS]: create a new empty project;
* [icon-download]: load an existing project from a file;
* [icon-help]: open this documentation.

The list of projects is shown below, and these actions are available:
* [icon-edit]: rename the project.
* [icon-duplicate]: duplicate the project.
* [icon-save]: save the project onto a save file.
* [icon-trash]: delete the project; confirmation will be requested.

## Frama-C Parameters {#framac-parameters}

All frama-c parameters can be modified from the GUI via the _Edit_ -> _Parameters_
menu or the _Ctrl+P_ shortcut.
This opens a modal window listing all available Frama-C plug-ins and their
parameters.

[icon-warning] When closing the modal window, any local change that has not been
applied to Frama-C is lost.

[icon-warning] Applying the changes modifies the Frama-C settings but does not
restart any analysis.

The parameters modal window is divided into three columns:
* 1: a list of available plugins
* 2: a left form with parameters of the Frama-C kernel (Ctrl+click in the plug-in list to change)
* 3: a right form: click in the plug-in list to change the selected plug-in

In the list of plug-ins:
* [led-warning] signals local changes which have not been applied yet (and will be lost if the window is closed).
* [led-active] indicates parameters which have already been modified for this Frama-C session.

In each plug-in form:
* Orange titles or fields signal local modifications which have not been applied yet.
* Blue titles or fields indicate parameters which have already been modified for this Frama-C session.

Buttons:
* [icon-reload]: reset field or form (without applying modification to Frama-C).
* [icon-push]: apply local modifications of field or form to Frama-C.
