# Eva {#eva}

Eva is a static analyzer intended to automatically prove the absence of
runtime errors in critical software.
It emits an [alarm](#eva-alarms) for each possible undefined behavior in a C
program.

To do so, Eva computes an over-approximation of the set of all possible values
of each variable at each program point. The values inferred can be inspected
within the [Values](#eva-values) table, in the _Eva Values_ default view.

[Studia](#eva-studia) can be used to track the origin of values computed by Eva:
it highlights all statements that may read or write a given lvalue.

The _Eva Summary_ default view shows general information about an Eva analysis
through the components [Summary](#eva-summary), [Coverage](#eva-coverage)
and [Flamegraph](#eva-flamegraph).

Finally, the [icon-apple] Eva sidebar allows the user to change some parameters
and run the analysis. However, for large code bases, it is recommended to run the
Eva analysis using the command line, saving the result via the -save parameter,
and then loading the resulting file in the graphical interface.

A complete documentation for the Eva plug-in can be found online:
[https://frama-c.com/download/frama-c-eva-manual.pdf](https://frama-c.com/download/frama-c-eva-manual.pdf)

## Status of the analysis {#eva-status}

All components related to the Eva plug-in show the analysis status in their
titlebar:
- [icon-cross]: no analysis has been run yet: all features related to Eva are
  disabled. An analysis can be configured and launched from the Eva sidebar.
- [icon-spinner]: an analysis is currently ongoing:
  most features related to Eva are disabled.
- [icon-warning]: an analysis has been aborted by an internal error
  or a user interruption: components are active but results are incomplete.
- [icon-check]: the analysis was successfully completed:
  all features related to Eva are enabled.

## List of alarms emitted by Eva {#eva-alarms}

All alarms emitted by an Eva analysis are listed in the **Properties** component,
which shows all ACSL properties of the program (either written by the user
or generated by Frama-C).

The right panel (toggled by the [icon-clipboard] in the component titlebar)
allows filtering the ACSL properties.
For instance, only selecting _Alarms_ in the _Source_ section only shows
the Eva alarms reporting for possible C undefined behaviors.

An Eva analysis also verifies the preconditions of calls to libc functions,
as well as any assertions, preconditions and postconditions written in the
analyzed program.
To display these properties, all kinds of _Source_ must be selected, as well as
_Assertions_, _Preconditions_ and _Postconditions_ in _Property kind_.

Finally, Eva may flag some alarms as "high priority":
these are alarms more likely to report a true bug in the program,
or to signal a significant loss of precision in the analysis.
A high priority alarm is an alarm that was invalid in at least one analysis
context: either this context cannot happen in a concrete execution and the
analysis is imprecise, or the alarm is real.
The _priority_ column of the table highlights such alarms.
In the right panel, the _high-priority only_ filter of the _Eva_ section hides
all non-priority alarms.

## Table of Values {#eva-values}

This component is the main tool to inspect in detail the values inferred by the
Eva analysis for any variable or expression at a given program point.
It is designed as a table, with a column for each evaluated expression and a
row for each callstack for which the expression is evaluated.

### Evaluating expressions or predicates

By default, the table only shows the values of the selected expression,
in a temporary column that changes each time the selected expression changes,
and is removed if no expression is selected.

The table also shows the truth value (valid, unknown, invalid) of a selected
ACSL predicate, according to the Eva analysis.

The [icon-pin] button in a column header pins the column, keeping it active
even when the related expression is no longer selected.
Using "Alt+Click" to select an expression in the AST component creates an
already pinned column.

One can also evaluate an arbitrary expression:
- first select a statement (or any expression within a statement)
  in the AST component. This will be the program point where the evaluation
  takes place.
- then use the shortcut "Ctrl+E", or the menu entry _Edit -> Evaluate_,
  or select _Evaluation_ when clicking on the button of the global toolbar
  search field.
- write the desired C expression or ACSL term in the toolbar search field
  (which should have been selected) and press _Enter_.

A new pinned column is added to the table, with the values inferred for the
given expression at the selected statement.
If the expression cannot be evaluated by Eva, an error notification is displayed.

### Content of the table

The column header shows the expression, and the program point at which
it has been evaluated.
It also contains two buttons:
+ [icon-pin] pins (or unpins) the column.
+ [icon-circ.close] removes the column.

If the program point is an instruction, the column is divided into two
sub-columns, showing the possible values inferred for the expression
respectively before and after the statement.
The set of values inferred for an expression can change at a statement:
- if it is an assignment that modifies the value of the expression;
- if it is an annotation that restricts the possible values of the expression;
- if an alarm has been emitted at this statement, restricting the possible
  values of the expression — as the analysis assumes the assertion guarding
  against the alarm holds after the statement.

If the program point is an if-then-else statement, the column is divided
into three sub-columns showing the possible values inferred for the expression
before the statement and at the beginning of the then and else branches
respectively.
This allows verifying whether the interpretation of the if-then-else condition
was precise enough to reduce the inferred values of the given expression.

### View by callstacks

By default, the table shows the set of all possible values for all possible
executions reaching the given program point.

In the component titlebar, the button [icon-items.list] enables the view by
callstack: the table shows one row per callstack for which the selected
program point has been reached by the analysis.
Clicking on the number in the leftmost column displays the row callstack
at the bottom of the component, as a list of call sites, going back to the
_main_ function. A click on a call site selects it in the **AST** component.

If there is more than one callstack, the first line shows the set of possible
values for all callstacks.

## Studia {#eva-studia}

To find all statements that may have read or written an lvalue:
- right-click on the lvalue in the AST component;
- select the menu entry _Studia: select reads_ or _Studia: select writes_.
- open the **Locations** component, which is now highlighted in the dock
  (on the bottom right of the main window).

This component lists all statements which may read or write the selected
lvalue, according to the Eva analysis.

Studia can also be used on arbitrary lvalues:
- select a statement in the AST component;
- click on the button of the global toolbar search field,
  and select _Studia: Reads_ or _Studia: Writes_;
- write the desired C lvalue in the toolbar search field
  (which should have been selected) and press _Enter_.

The memory location of the lvalue is evaluated at the selected statement:
for instance, if the lvalue is a pointer access, its memory location depends on
the set of possible values of the pointer at the given statement.

As before, the **Locations** component lists all statements that may read or
write this memory location, according to the Eva analysis.

## Summary {#eva-summary}

This component displays a summary of an Eva analysis. It is identical to the
summary displayed in the Frama-C log at the end of an Eva analysis.

The _Coverage_ section shows:
- the number of function bodies analyzed by Eva, over the total number of
  function bodies provided in the source files provided to Frama-C.
  Functions whose body cannot be analyzed (such as functions without body or
  functions specified to the -eva-use-spec parameter) are ignored.
- the number of statements reached by the analysis over the total number of
  statements in the analyzed functions.

The _Errors_ section shows the number of warnings and errors emitted by the
Eva plug-in or the Frama-C kernel during the analysis. These warnings or errors
can be inspected in the **Messages** component.

The _Alarms_ section shows the number of alarms emitted by the Eva analysis.
Alarms can be inspected in the **Properties** component.
Each alarm reports a possible undefined behavior.

Finally, the _Statuses_ section shows the number of ACSL assertions and
function preconditions evaluated by the analysis:
- Valid: the annotation has been proved correct by Eva.
- Unknown: the Eva analysis could not prove the annotation.
- Invalid: the annotation has been proved to be false by Eva.

## Coverage {#eva-coverage}

This table shows for each function analyzed by Eva:
- the number of alarms emitted by Eva in this function;
- the number of sure alarms (invalid status) emitted by Eva in this function;
- the number of statements reached by the analysis;
- the number of statements not reached, considered as dead code by the analysis;
- the total number of statements in the function;
- the coverage, i.e. the percentage of reached statements over the total number
  of statements.

Selecting a row selects the related function in the **AST** component,
in which all statements unreached by the analysis are grayed out.

## Flamegraph {#eva-flamegraph}

The flamegraph shows the time Eva spent analyzing each possible callstack
of the program.

## States {#eva-states}

When a statement is selected (for instance in the AST component),
this component prints the internal state of the analysis domains inferred by the
Eva analysis at this statement.
A dropdown list selects the displayed domain, among domains enabled by the
-eva-domains parameter.

This component is experimental and intended to help debug Eva issues.

## MThread {#eva-mthread}

The MThread component is made up of 3 elements:

* a title bar showing the status of eva and the help button,
* a toolbar for changing the display mode between `thread` and `variable`,
* a list of items to be displayed as cards

### Threads

The cards display 4 types of information for each thread displayed:

* Errors: a thread contains an error if the mutexes taken do not match the mutexes released.
* Mutex: list of mutexes.
* Message: list of messages.
* Variable: list of variables.

Mutexes, messages and variables are displayed as buttons.
When clicked, items of the same type are highlighted throughout the list.

Filters are available in the toolbar.

### Variables

The `variable` type display highlights the protection of shared variables.

Each card shows a title bar followed by the list of mutexes that
protect the variable in read and write mode.

The following elements are shown for each variable and each type of access:

* [led-positive]: variable or access is protected
* [led-warning]: variable or access is maybe protected
* [led-negative]: variable or access is unprotected
* [icon-multicheck]: the click will select all associated markers
* [icon-table]: displayed only for arrays. When clicked, only this table will be displayed,
  followed by all its zones (the other filters still apply).

Mutexes are displayed as buttons, when clicked, all associated markers are selected.

Having all accesses protected does not mean that the variable is protected.
At least one mutex must protect the variable for both reading and writing.
